Teacher notes
The following page provides you with a sample IA, graded under
the new criteria and was part of the sample provided to workshop
leaders, during the recent IB workshop training. Sample number
1a - microeconomics is designed to be graded alongside sample
number 1b, 1c and (FI). This is an exemplary example of an essay
written under the new criteria.

Commentary 1
Title of the article: LED Streetlights Bring Cost Savings, and Headaches, To Colorado Cities
Source of the article: Colorado Public Radio online site
http://www.cpr.org/news/story/ledstreetlightsbringcostsavingsandheadachestocoloradociti es
(Accessed 20 February 2017)
Date the article was published: 15 September 2016
Date the commentary was written: 17 March 2017
Word count of the commentary: 792 words
Unit of the syllabus to which the article relates: Microeconomics
Key concept being used: Efficiency

Article
LED Streetlights Bring Cost Savings, And Headaches, To Colorado Cities
The city of Denver is in the midst of a nearly $2 million project to replace lighting poles, fixtures and bulbs
on the 13-block 16th Street Mall.
On their way out: High-pressure sodium lights that have an orange hue. On their way in: White LEDs.
“These street lights are about 30 years old. It was time for an upgrade,” said Denver Public Works
spokeswoman Heather Burke. “Technology changes. It was time to change with it,”
Denver planned for years before converting the iconic 1970s-era light fixtures along the 16th Street Mall
sidewalks to LED lights. They meet new guidelines issued this June by the American Medical Association
(AMA).
Across the country, more than 10 percent of outdoor lighting is powered by LEDs. Because the energy
savings can be as much as 50 percent, many cities want to make the change. But there are also health
implications to consider; LED lights that appear too blue can suppress melatonin production, which can
lead to increased diabetes and depression.
The newer LED lights cost the same,
provide the same cost savings and
last as long as older versions, so
“there’s absolutely no reason to put in
bad lighting,” said Dr. Mario Motta,
who serves on the AMA’s Council on
Science and Public Health. “You can
put in good lighting.”
Smarter Technology
In June, the AMA issued three core
guidelines for cities. It suggested
using lights that are 3000 degrees
Kelvin or below, referring to the colour
temperature of lights, where lower
numbers appear warmer. Most older
versions of LED streetlights installed
before 2016 were 4000 Kelvin or
above.
The AMA also advised cities to properly shield LEDs to reduce glare, and to make lights dimmable.
Professional groups including the Illuminating Engineering Society criticized the guidelines as too specific.
The U.S. Department of Energy pointed out that blue light is not unique to LEDs.
Lighting designer Nancy Clanton of the Boulder-based firm Clanton & Associates said the technology that
comes with LEDs can offer cities new options.
Clanton has helped design LED streetlights for a number of cities including San Diego and Anchorage. In
San Jose, she worked to install smarter technology that allows the city to dim street lights.
"Right before the bars close, they increase the lighting level so that everyone knows it’s time to go home,
and then they decrease it back down again,” she said.
This dimming technology will be installed in Colorado Department of Transportation lights in the coming
years. Dimming is also possible on new lights Clanton’s firm helped design for the 16th Street Mall.
Denver Public Works spokeswoman Heather Burke said the poles and globe lights will look the same to
most. But there’s one noticeable change. Designers have restored a halo of lights that has been dark for
years; lost when Denver planners switched light bulb types decades ago.
"The twinkle rings, you can see that ring up there. On the old lights they were inoperable for a long time.
So those are restored now. And it’s going to create a brighter more inviting light for folks,” she said.
The AMA guidelines were a challenge for cities that had already invested time and money converting to
LEDs. Some cities like Lake Worth, Florida, changed course and opted for warmer LED streetlights. For
Ouray, on the Western Slope, which installed LEDs in 2009, the AMA guidelines released this year were
just another bump in a long road adjusting to the new technology.
City Administrator Patrick Rondinelli said Ouray was the first in the state to make the move. A huge selling
point was preserving darker night skies.
“In Ouray we’re very fortunate. We can actually still see the Milky Way. You get to Denver, you can’t see
that anymore,” he said.
But since 2009, Ouray has noticed a few hiccups as an early adopter of LED technology. LEDs cast a
more narrow light pattern compared to other lights. After installation, suddenly large sections of
neighbourhood blocks went dark. Only the intersections -- where the LED street lights were placed --
appeared lit.
That’s a problem when you have bears walking down side streets.
“As our law enforcement are trying to chase bears around and get them out of the community, they have a
hard time seeing a lot of that,” said Rondinelli.
Rondinelli said he doesn’t know what to make of the recent AMA guidelines. Overall, citizen feedback has
been positive and cost savings have helped the city’s bottom line.
“We’ve had some lessons learned along the way. But there’s no regrets,” he said.
Since LED technology changes so quickly, there may actually be a benefit in moving slowly.
If a proposed budget item is passed, Fort Collins will swap about one-third of its streetlights to LEDs in
2017 and 2018.
Fort Collins Engineering Manager Kraig Bader said the city hopes to install 3000 and 4000 Kelvin lights
with varying brightness depending on how large and busy streets are. It plans to study the results before
converting the rest of the city’s lights.
“In essence we’re going slow to go fast later on,” he said.
(Colorado Public Radio, Sep 15, 2016) http://www.cpr.org/news/story/ledstreetlightsbringcostsavingsandheadachestocoloradocities

Commentary
Many problems are associated with the economic evaluation and provision of public goods. How should
communities proceed with the installation of LED streetlights in order to ensure that there is allocative
efficiency, with the social surplus being maximized where marginal social cost=marginal social benefit
(MSC=MSB)?
Streetlights are public goods because they are non-rivalrous and non-excludable. This causes
complications when attempting to analyse their advantages (Figure 1).
Figure 1: Cost/benefit model for sodium and LED streetlights
The MSC1 curve represents the supply curve of
sodium streetlights. The marginal private benefit
(MPB), or demand curve for streetlights, does
not intersect with the MSC curve because
streetlights are public goods. This signifies that
the free rider problem is occurring no-one (or, in
reality, very few people) will buy the good
because they are all waiting for someone else to
buy it. However, the city government ought to
pay for these goods, as the MSB of streetlights
is high. Before the implementation of LEDs, the
optimum or efficient output was Q1 where the
MSB curve intersects the MSC1 curve.
Although the article mentions that LEDs “cost
the same”, the MSC2 curve for LED streetlights
is below the MSC1 curve. This is because
private costs are lower, and “energy savings can
be as much as 50 percent”, signifying that the costs of using the lights, for many years after
implementation, will decrease significantly.
Therefore, the MSC curve will drop. Simultaneously, the efficient quantity of LED streetlights the city ought
to acquire will increase from Q1 to Q2. From the diagram, it can be seen that the city can reduce the costs
spent on streetlights and at the same time obtain more. The extra lights can be stored until some need to
be replaced, implying that costs in the budget for future purchases of the replacement of lights can also be
saved.
However, the disadvantages of LED are associated health problems, namely an external cost of
consumption (Figure 2).
Figure 2: Negative Consumption Externality of LED streetlights
Because streetlights are public goods, the D (MPB) curve has been shown to be almost irrelevant to the
model. Instead, the externality (“health implications” of “increased diabetes and depression”) is shown by
the downwards shift of the MSB1 curve to MSB2. The marginal external cost notated in the diagram
supposedly measures the per unit negative impact of individual health problems on society.
The diagram shows that the efficient quantity of LEDs is not QP (initially predicted quantity), but QA (actual
quantity). It also implies that in order to dissuade cities from implementing harmful LED lights, the efficient
“price” of the LED lights at QA will not be cost/benefit2, where MSB2=MSC, but instead at cost/benefit3.
This diagram supports Fort Collins’ argument for
changing only part of the city’s streetlights to
LED lighting. It illustrates that because of the
negative externality, LED lighting, while
apparently more “cost-efficient”, has problems.
However, the negative externality is probably not
so large that LED lighting should be completely
eliminated from the city government’s options. It
makes sense for Fort Collins to “swap one third
of its streetlights to LEDs”. Furthermore, Fort
Collins mentioned that they hope to “install 3000
and 4000 Kelvin lights with varying brightness”
and “study the results” before making further
decisions about whether they will replace the
rest of the city’s lights. This exemplifies how
communities may use economic models to
assess the advantages and disadvantages of
public goods, with the aim of improving the wellbeing of their citizens and reaching allocative
efficiency.
However, there are also many limitations to the models above. The models are all static, and do not reflect
development of LEDs an example of rapidly improving, new and clean technology. Research has
probably been conducted in order to reduce harmful blue light, and costs of the lights have also been
reduced. As the article suggests, the cities have probably taken measures to reduce negative impacts,
such as warmer lights, shielding and dimming.
Additionally, more variables should be considered. For instance, the article mentions positive externalities
of consumption of LEDs due to the ability to preserve darker night skies. There are also problems
associated with LED light patterns being narrow and therefore posing danger of bear attacks. The city
must consider different aspects because LEDs are public goods which need to benefit citizens, not only
the city budget.
Finally, all the curves and points on the models are qualitative although they reflect directional shifts, it is
impossible to determine the monetary cost of negative and positive externalities. Therefore, applying
corrections based on these static models will be unrealistic.
In conclusion, analysis shows that installation of LEDs in some streetlights will save costs while minimizing
negative externalities. However, in order to ensure that allocative efficiency is improved, the city
government should closely monitor effects on society and citizens’ feedback to make decisions based on
reality rather than just on the abstract models.

Assessment criteria
Use the official IB economics IA criteria when assessing this work, available at IA criteria
Criterion A: Diagrams
Level descriptor
The commentary includes two diagrams, both relevantly labelled with an appropriate title. Switches
the horizontal axis effectively from “Quantity of streetlights” to “Quantity of LED lights” for the second
diagram. The explanations are clear and correct (3/3)
Criterion B: Terminology
Level descriptor
Precise and appropriate economic terminology is used. Concise definition of the relevant term “public
good” and a correct understanding of the other terms e.g. external cost of consumption is shown by the
way they are used (2/2)
Criterion C: Application and analysis
Level descriptor
Cost-benefit analysis is used appropriately and correctly linked to the article. The first diagram
contains a demand curve to the left of the optimum, representing the small number of consumers who
might be willing and able to pay the commercial price for street lights. This being the situation in the
real world rather than the zero consumers prepared to pay this price in pure public good theory.
Situations where the candidate goes beyond the textbook should be rewarded (3/3).
Criterion D: Key concept
Level descriptor
There is recognition that the key concept of efficiency is difficult to calculate and legislate for, given
the external costs associated with LED streetlights, Nonetheless it is seen as necessary for
governments to try to move closer to achieving efficiency (3/3).
Criterion E: Evaluation
Level descriptor
There is comprehensive evaluation included in the commentary and the candidate presents a balance
of strengths and weaknesses in the commentary. A short summary conclusion is included (3/3).
Overall comments and grade
Overall this was an excellent commentary which scored full marks - 14/14.
