is it ok to take a gap year after high school? Like, will it impact my chances at applying to universities?

I want you to give me a really unique perspective at this while being very practical and rational.

I want to pursue some personal ultralearning projects and attain some practical experience in mechatronics engineering, which is the major I want to take up at uni. I also want to take up apprenticeships and also work with my dad in his new business

But I’m also really worried about any hidden bad things, about taking a gap year, like what if the universities that I apply to, holds a grudge against the fact that i took a gap year, what if it sees it as a negative point?

During the gap year I plan to do a bunch of things:
Getting a 45 in IBDP
Joining my dad’s new modular furniture business
Apprenticeships under any reputed and skilled Mechatronics engineer
Ultralearning projects for university course content and soft skills like public speaking, corporate tongue and manipulative language.

And it’s not like I’ll be losing any of my academic momentum…

I mean, being a stakeholder in a business, being an apprentice,and doing ultralearning projects is enough to keep my momentum not only maintained but accelerating.
——

I must also mention that my gap year effectively starts from 1 Jan 2025 and my IBDP exams will be in the month of may and June, and on top of that my grades are at rock bottom, like my Predicted grades are less than the passing point with this 24. So, I’ll have to juggle this gap year and IBDP, while also maintaining my focus on aggressive personal growth.

Today is 22nd nov of 2024, I am currently focusing the months November, December and January, to fully get my grades up from rock bottom to a fucking 45/45.

I should go a little more deeper on the issue of focus, motivation and drive towards aggressive growth. Due to multiple years of brainrot at the hands of YouTube, porn and Instagram I have completely sapped myself of any kind of drive towards my studies and aggressive growth. But there is a silver lining here, my innate sense of drive before this brain rot era of my life is still there in me like a dormant beast and it only wakes up when I have abstained from porn and media brainrot, which is basically dopamine overdose, which results in m dopamine baseline being rocketed up to the skies, which makes the dopamine from real growth seem very insignificant. 

So here’s the gist of the problem in quitting this brainrot, the dopamine baseline is super high and I need at least 3 months to fully break free, but I need to abstain for at least 1 month straight to build the momentum and gain a significant amount of the drive and mental capacity.

I have also thought about my environment and altering it in such a way that it is a constant reminder of my goal and the pain that should be fuelling my progress, basically a reality check that I cannot refute in the moment of being ensnared by the brainrot.

We should get into the nitty gritty of the environment modding, but first of all, I will detail what my current environment is like:

1. I live in a 2BHK villa where the hall and kitchen are connected by a mini common hall space.
2. I live with my parents my grandfather and my sister.
3. I share a room with my sister and grandfather and the other room is taken by my parents, in the room I share there is a single two person bed and a foldable bed which I open and lay out on the floor and night to sleep on and I need to pack it back up in the morning .
4. There are in total of four workstations in the house, one is only for my sister, two stations have a computer on them and one is just a portable desk that i can use to do offline study, out of the two computer workstations, one is dedicated to me and the other one is a shared workspace between me and my dad, this shared computer is the most powerful one we have and I frequently use it to run and build complex software. Also the shared computer resides in the bedroom of my parents and the other three reside in the room that I share, and of course the portable desk can be moved to anywhere quiet in the house.

I’m detailing all of this so that you can fully understand what the situation is, I would love to be able stick up loads to messages and other motivational pieces but that might interfere with the mental peace and workflow of the rest of my family, not to mention the ridicule I might face with certain messages, from my mom.
——

Alright so we have two things that we really need to go gung ho on:

1. What exactly will be the material that I put up into whatever visual cues that I setup.
2. How exactly will I manage and schedule the use of all the resources I have available and also schedule the stuff that I need learn as part of my IBDP coursework, I tried to build an entire web app under the pretence of building a CS IA but that didn’t work out as making application requires huge swathes of time, energy and effort, all of which I cannot spare, it would be ridiculous to spend all the time that I should be using to study, into developing an application that helps me study, the option of just studying whatever is much more effective that studying nothing.

I need you to first dive into the 2nd area.
——

I have a little point here to mention, I can’t really tell what concept is hard as I can understand all of the concepts that come my way.
